Modifs à la page na_en.htm, 24 avril 2012

Je n'avais pas bien prêté attention aux documents précédents d'enquête phonologique: les noms composés.
Pour tones 14 (body parts/animals) il semble qu'il y ait eu un pb et que le fichier XML ne soit pas en ligne. Qd on affiche on n'a que le son; et qd on veut télécharger via la page de métadonnées ça dit "
Page en construction"
Je te le renvoie. Pour celui-ci tu vas sans doute devoir refaire des ajustements (supprimer les "points hauts"; et quoi d'autre? je ne sais pas) puisque je suis reparti de mon fichier de départ.
Pour les autres fichiers j'ai tout vérifié, et modifié en type "enquête de vocabulaire".

Pour WORDLIST, il faut indiquer après xsi:schemaLocation="http://crdo.risc.fr/schemas/annotation http://purl.oclc.org/NET/crdo/schemas/archive.xsd"
?
c'est ce que j'ai fait; s'il faut écrire autre chose à cet endroit-là tu me dis.

J'ai aussi changé tous les titres pour les mettre en anglais.

Je joins donc ces docs, et aussi 
- un nouveau document: Tone_Peoples. Comme souvent je me suis mal organisé et j'ai envoyé le fichier son avant d'avoir modifié son nom :( qui est à changer en: crdo-NRU_F4_TONEPEOPLES.wav
Pour les métadonnées, c'est "comme toujours" pour cette locutrice; la date à indiquer est: 2006. C'est de l'audio mono, pas de pb technique de ce côté-là.
- un texte de présentation pour la page na_en.htm. En fait je t'avais déjà envoyé la présentation (au format HTML) le 20 février mais à l'époque on n'était pas aussi bien organisé :) et l'envoi avait dû te parvenir de façon trop dispersée.


Le titre actuel
"Phonological data: Numeral-plus-classifier phrases in Yongning Na:"

est à modifier en: 
"Documenting the morphophonology of Yongning Na"

avec comme première sous-section
"Numeral-plus-classifier phrases in Yongning Na"
(inchangée)

et comme 2e sous-section
"Subject-verb and object-verb combinations"
avec comme texte introductif:
In view of the range of tone categories found on nouns and verbs in Yongning Na, it is no wonder that their combinations yield a wealth of diverse patterns. This section presents recordings of combinations between verbs and subject or object nouns.
et ici un lien vers les 3 documents.

et comme 3e sous-section
"Compound nouns"
et comme texte introductif: 
"In Yongning Na, no tonal change takes place in possessive constructions, whereas tonal changes take place in compounds. In possessive constructions, the possessive /bv̩/ is added after the determiner, before the head, e.g. /hw˧li˧˥/ ‘cat’, /ɬv̩˧˥/ ‘brains’, /hwɤ˧li˧-bv̩˥ ǀ ɬv̩˧˥/ ‘brains of the cat’. The tone pattern of the head (the second noun) remains the same as in isolation. In determinative compounds, the order of constituents is, again, determiner plus head, but the tonal strings that result from compounding are not simply the concatenation of those found in isolation. The data set presented here is the result of a systematic investigation into the tones of compound nouns in Yongning Na. 

1) Animal names+body parts: 

Combining animal names with names of body parts appeared as a useful means of eliciting most combinations. A good place to start from is the 12th document:

Tone_BodyPartsOfAnimals_12_F4_2008_withEGG [NOTE A SEVERINE: AJOUTER LE LIEN]

as this file contains the most complete and systematic recording, with an accompanying electroglottographic signal. The compound nouns are framed in the sentence 'This is...': proximal demonstrative /ʈʂʰɯ˥ ǀ +target item +copula, /ɲi˩/. The demonstrative is realized [ʈʂʰɯ˧] due to utterance-initial position. The tone of the copula in context is determined by the tone of the compound. 

The elicitation was arranged by head rather than by determiner: 'pig's skin' then 'tiger's skin', etc. This limits the repetitiveness of the successive items, because the tone of the head has less influence on that of the compound than the tone of the determiner: 'pig's skin', 'pig's intestines', 'pig fat'... are more similar tonally than 'pig's skin', 'tiger's skin', 'sheep's skin'... The annotated transcriptions, on the other hand, are arranged by determiner ('pig's skin', 'pig's intestines', 'pig fat'...; then 'tiger's skin', 'tiger's intestines' and so on), as this seemed the more useful order of presentation to study the tone system.

In Naxi body part names are the same for all animals: a person's nose is referred to by the same word as a pig's snout, a dog's muzzle... In order to facilitate automated searches, the incorrect but uniform translation "X's nose" (dog's nose, pig's nose...) is provided along with a more correct translation, e.g. "pig's nose (pig's snout)". For the same reason, all the compounds are translated as "DETERMINER's HEAD", e.g. "sheep's skin", even though some of them would call for another translation: as one single word for "sheepskin", without an intervening possessive particle for "wolf skin", etc. The purpose is not to provide an idiomatic translation but to allow easy access to the Na data. In the Chinese translations, the syntax adopted is "DETERMINER_HEAD", e.g. 猪皮.

The earliest recordings (audio only), which date back to my first contact with the language, in 2006, are less complete because I was just beginning the process of sorting out how many tonal categories there were. The data are also less homogeneous because I asked for more repetitions when I needed confirmation; also, I tried various frames. These data are nonetheless provided too, as extra confirmation for the tone patterns that I report, and also because some items are pronounced with extreme care, in order to teach me the correct patterns at a stage when I had no proficiency in the language at all, so they can be useful for someone who wants to go through the same process of becoming familiar with the language.

Some comments about the sound files:

The file Tone_BodyPartsOfAnimals_1to4_F4_2006 [NOTE A SEVERINE: AJOUTER LE LIEN] was created by assembling four files that had been recorded in succession (with pauses in-between each recording). The compounds are elicited in isolation; a few tokens are also pronounced with the existential /dʑu˩/. Likewise, Tone_BodyPartsOfAnimals_8to10_F4_2008_withEGG was created by assembling three successive recordings.

The file number 15 [NOTE A SEVERINE: AJOUTER LE LIEN] dates back to the first fieldwork; exchanges between the interviewer and the consultant were cut out. The other recordings were left unchanged, so that interested people can know precisely at which point in the exchange a specific token was said: how many repetitions precede it, how it was elicited, etc. This can shed light on the reason why the speaker places special emphasis on a given dimension: the entire tone sequence, one of the tones, one of the consonants or vowels... Some notes on this topic are added in the annotation, such as "Hyperarticulated realization, bringing out the final L tone."

[NOTE A SEVERINE: AJOUTER ICI LES LIENS VERS LES AUTRES FICHIERS]

Transcriptions are provided both in a surface-phonological system using tone letters (˥ for high, ˧ for mid, ˩ for low, ˩˥ for low-to-high, ˧˥ for mid-to-high) and in an abstract notation system set out in Michaud 2008. 

Numerous topics can be investigated on the basis of these data. Among phonetic topics, I can think of the following.

(i) Phonation type at voicing offset. In the absence of any phonologically specified phonation type at voicing offset, how often does the utterance end in glottal constriction, laryngealization, and whispery voice/devoicing?

(ii) Fundamental frequency 'resetting' at the juncture/boundary between phonological groups. In a group such as /hĩ˧-bv˧ ǀ ʁu˧qʰwɤ˩/ 'human head', to what extent does one observe a greater discrepancy between successive tones than within a phonological group? Which linguistic uses are made of this latitude of variation?




:)