It's said that it happened like this:
Long ago there were two siblings, an older brother and a younger sister.  The brother went out deerstalking and he lived in the deep forest for several years.  As for the sister, she stayed at home. The brother didn't come back, and the sister was given in marriage to someone.
During the wedding ceremony, when they were eating and drinking, everyone sat in their correct places: important people were seated at the head, near the fireplace, and less important people were seated at the foot, near the door.  So everyone was seated in place: important people sat here and here and here, and so on to the end of the room.
Then the big brother came back from hunting in the mountains.  His dog had been following the trail of an animal and had arrived at the mountain pass.  The brother called the dog, but couldn't find it, so he tracked, tracked, tracked the dog's footprints, and arrived at the house where his sister was getting married, and his dog went and stood in the entrance of the hearth room.  
Then the sister said, "Get outside, you fleabag dog!" And the people of the household to which the sister had been given in marriage said, "Fleabag, you get outside!" Then the older brother leapt in and sat inside the entrance of the hearth room.  “Isn't this our sister?" he thought as he sat there. Then he turned away so that his sister couldn't see his face and sat there. When everyone had taken their places, he turned around again. 
Now, a big piece of meat - pork ribs - had been boiled and one piece was given to each person.  There were big pieces and smaller pieces and even smaller pieces. Well, the piece of meat given to the brother was very small indeed.
After all the meat had been distributed, the wine was poured, one bowl for each person.  The sister poured a little into everyone's bowl until she got to the end, and then she gave some to her brother. Then people picked up their bowls and began to eat. The important guests were very happy as they ate. But as for the brother, he sat at the back of the room feeling grumpy. He sat there as people were eating and eating and eating, and then he said to his dog, "When food is scant, people don't have the heart to eat. Dog, you eat these tiny pork chops!"  Then he said, "When wine is scant, people can't drink enough to get merry. Black earth, you drink this wine!  Black earth, drink these three bowls of good wine!"  Then he picked up the wine and poured it onto the ground.
Yes, it happened like this, it's said, long ago.
An older brother and a younger sister are an inseparable pair, as it should be.  The big brother went hunting in the high mountains but the little sister was at home. When the sister was about to be given in marriage, her brother did not come back. And when he did come back, his sister didn't recognise him!  She was sitting there eating food and drinking wine, and this made him sad.  So he took the alcohol and poured in onto the ground, and he took the meat and gave it to his dog. He was very sad. Then he wrapped himself in his coarse felt cloak and got up to leave.
Just as he was leaving, the sister thought: "This is my own brother!"  She grabbed at his cloak, but he fled. "You are my big brother!" she said.  The brother unsheathed his knife.  He turned this way and cut a piece off his cloak, he turned that way and cut another piece off his cloak, which the sister was holding on to.  She tried to grab the front of her brother's cloak, but she could only grab the edge, which the brother then cut to push her off.
Then, the little sister died!  She died of a broken heart.
Well, the family put her corpse on the funeral pyre for three days and three nights, but she didn't burn up. They turned her corpse this way and that; they pierced her here, but her body was not consumed; they pierced her there, but her corpse did not burn up!
So the family went to find the big brother, and said to him: "Aren't you her brother? This is what has happened to your little sister. Aren't you her brother? We know nothing about your family's stories." 
Then the big brother went to the funeral pyre, and said to his little sister: "Don't make things so complicated!  Oh, things have turned out like this! Well, don't make such a big fuss! Let bygones be bygones!  I really am your brother and you are my little sister! Don't be upset." And he cut a piece from the front of his cloak and threw it into the fire, and then the corpse was burnt up.
Now, these days, if a sister is given in marriage, when she dies the family that she married into says the ritual 'sikee' concerning her older brother. "Sikee! The uncle has come back!" they say.  "Ae-hi-hi! Let the ritual begin!"  Along the road they say: "Sikee! The uncle has come back!"  They prostrate themselves and say, "Ae-hi-hi!", as they go back to the woman's original home.  Then they whack the pillar of the house, pretending to cut it with an axe or a knife. They hit the threshold of the house and leap about. They must hit the pillar three times.  "Sikee! The uncle has arrived!" they say.
In those days, this was how they expressed their fury. It was called 'sikee' and 'zhukee' when one of our people died.  If your sister marries into another family and she dies, the 'sikee' ritual is carried out.  When people arrive at the other family's house, they cry: "Ae-hi-hi!"  The people of the family that the women married into cry and prostrate themselves. "Sorry! Sorry! Sorry!" they say.  As for the family that the dead person came from, the older sibling should cry: "Ae-hi-hi!"  Traditionally, they must come, their whole extended family, no matter where they are living, crying: "Sikee, the uncle has come back! It's the uncle!" All the people from the village, no matter how many, they all go back and they must eat the other family's food!  They don't bring anything with them: no food, no gifts, no gift box or anything.  They arrive completely empty handed!  Oh! The family eats and sleeps at this home for three days and three nights. "Sikee! The uncle has come back," they say. They must be afraid and really prostrate themselves!
Then the person taking the role of the uncle says a word to express his discontent. "Tonight I will cut down the pillar of your house. I will cut your threshold," he must say. Oh! This is how he would speak to them.
So, in the past, when a person died and people were in mourning, the two rituals 'sikee' and 'zhukee' were carried out.  People would say, "The sikee person has come;  we sikee people have come back to this home!"
The people of the family doing 'sikee' were beautiful, proudly dressed in their finest clothes, jewelry and hats!  The people of the family doing 'zhukee' came bringing food and carrying Tibetan flags on their shoulders.  Ah, it was a beautiful sight to behold!  The people doing 'sikee' would come calling: "Ae-hi-hi!"  They showed anger but they would not cry.  They would arrive shouting: "Ae-hi-hi!"  Then, the people of the family that the sister had married into would turn around and cry and say: "Sorry!" As for the people doing 'zhukee', well, these people cry! They carry Tibetan flags on their shoulders. Regardless of whether it was a person's mother, or older sister or younger sister, they would come crying, like this.  This is the way it was done in the past.
Who really knows if this was true or not?  It's only a story people have heard! But that's how it is supposed to have happened.  People carried out the ritual like this, it's said.  
So there is this saying: "No dinner for the married woman, no lunch for the black dog". Dogs do not get fed during the daytime: they only get fed once in the morning and once in the evening.  If a married woman goes back to her original home for a visit during the day, she cannot stay for the evening meal, as she has obligations back at the household she has married into. That's what they say! That's how the story is told! She can't stay for dinner! "No dinner for the married woman, no lunch for the black dog!"
Well, as for getting married, there are some things that should not be done. Na people actually should not be given in marriage, isn't that right?  
So when a daughter was given in marriage, there was this custom.  The tradition can be seen from the proverb. The story has been told like this from long ago. Now, people from the past don't exist anymore. This story is only what our great-grandmother told us long ago. She also told us where our family came from long ago and she would explain how one must perform rites at the ancestral altar.  She also told us the history of the various households in Alawua village. Is there anyone who could possibly be more knowledgeable than she was?




THESE LINES NOT INCLUDED IN WHOLE TEXT TRANSLATION.
Long ago (according to custom), a man (lit: person) came back from hunting.
(A) woman given in marriage, (she) went to (the family of the) hunter, in days long ago.
Then, (it was) like this (that) the older brother was not at home, then,
(she) died, (she) didn't see (her) brother, (but he) was there, ah.... she didn't see. Then,
(because) the two parents had given (their daughter) in marriage,
(but her) older brother had not been interested, so
"no lunch for (the) black dog, no dinner for (the married) woman", it's said.
(The) dog, well.... (the sister thought:) "(My) older brother must be that person!"
Well, (he) didn't get any lunch!
Then (the brother) gave (the little bit of food that was reluctantly given to him) to the dog to eat!
On that day long ago, well, on that day,
(he) gave the tiny pork ribs to the dog. Then,
(the) dog only got this little bit of lunch!
"No lunch for (the) black dog, no dinner for (the married) woman", (this is what they) say, this little pork rib...
"(There's) not (even) enough food for leftovers," (the brother) said. "Black dog, you eat it!" it's told.
"(The) drink is scant, there is not enough (to get merry). Black earth, (you) drink (these) three bowls (of alcohol)!"
Then (he) took the bowl of alcohol (and) poured it out (on the ground), so...
(he) stood up and left. Then (the little sister) tried to grab (him), but was not able to, long ago, so it's said.
This is how it's told!
Well, in the past, it was told like this!
Well, we.... (don't know) if it's true or not, (we only) know it like this (i.e. this account of the story).
Well, in the past, it happened like this, this (story), long ago.
People, right? Daughters (are) given in marriage, it's told like this.
(If) a person is going to look for (someone to marry), no matter who (they) look for,
daughters, (they) will get married (lit: be given in marriage).
In the past, (this) was the tradition, ah!
"No dinner for (the married) woman, no lunch for (the) black dog", this is how it's told.

